---
layout: post
title:  "Endorphin Crave"
date:   2013-11-02 18:35:04
categories: jekyll update
excerpt: Having picked up a passion for both sports and with winter descending fast, the idea looms before my eyes. Cold icy mornings. Wet snow-covered evenings. How will I get my daily dose?
---
Its in the eyes. You can almost feel it. Have you ever seen a caged tiger? Probably yes. Something must have impacted you. The largest land predator. The massive Wolverine-like claws. The thirst of blood in his movements. Or perhaps it was the eyes. Those eyes of a creature that belongs in the jungle. A predator that seeks the next prey, the next challenge. In the wild. Outdoors. Against the world.

Cyclists and runners have these same eyes of frustrated self encaging. Being limited by the elements or by ulterior conditions that prevent them from challenging the medium that they so adeptly conquer time and time again. It got me thinking of Eddy Merckx. Never recognized as much as Armstrong and Indurain, but the Cannibal sits in sports heaven with Jordan, Maradona, Pele and Schumacher. If you have never heard of him, roll back to 1968, Eddy Merckx was still just 23, a fledging talent still waiting for the Grand Tours victory that would stamp his name in the wider public’s imagination. 11 days into the Giro d’Italia, the race was wide open. By the end of the single-mountain stage, a cycling colossus had been born. Merckx powered through driving snowflakes, bare-armed as crowds shivered in overcoats by the snow-covered roadside in one of the toughest climbs of the Tour. He won the stage by over four minutes and went on to seal his first Grand Tours win. If you read about him you can see that whether it rained or snowed, if it was scorching hot or extremely steep, he wouldn’t mind. He loved competing and winning. Winning against a medium that time and again put another obstacle for him to jump. No other cyclist in history has dominated the sport in its entirety. Even when injured or sick, caged by impediment, he would defy logic and hit the road. A real predator does not conform himself with the prey he just killed, he always seeks more.

Why? Probably because they are hungry for glory. Maybe because they just like to rack up trophies. Or maybe it’s because of endorphins. These tiny pseudo-neuroreceptors pack opioids that are delivered throughout the body’s tissues and cells. Normally activated during exercise, orgasms and highly savored foods, they resemble the effects of opium in generating a sense of euphoria and well being. Triathlonists, marathonists and usually other members of high endurance sports can attest to the temptations of endorphins. I have heard stories of runners that would replace sex for a 5 hour run on an empty stomach. And cyclists that would ride in below zero temperatures to only feel ecstasy running through their bodies after a strong climb. You can become addicted to this. But unless you are doing something way illegal or offensive, there is no shame in being called an endorphin junkie. But it is these little receptors that float within us that when your body hits 25km and you are still running, you might feel butterflies and your mind begins to enter a similar state to that achieved through meditation.

Having picked up a passion for both sports and with winter descending fast, the idea looms before my eyes. Cold icy mornings. Wet snow-covered evenings. How will I get my daily dose? Running in torrential rains along the Canal de Saint Martin. Cycling up the Col d’Ibañeta with marble-sized hail falling. We never get perfect conditions. There is always an obstacle that gets in the way. But it is those who rise to the occasion that claim glory at the top of the mountain. You know how you are supposed to eat, sleep, breathe to function properly. The rest is secondary. These are primary necessities of the human being. Running has somehow squeezed itself into that select list. I used to control my mood swings or my cravings through exteriorized anger and temptation yielding. But that slowly started to change. I noticed that whenever I hit the road, the hours that followed were always an Elysian stroll. I felt good after pounding kilometer after kilometer. I needed it. So temperament became a variable subject to the physical activity I had powered through last. I researched the optimal ways into releasing or even creating endorphins. Peak exercise times, neural catalysts and diet tweaks were on my to-do reading list. Finding the biohack to making the brain sparks light up faster would be revolutionary. The triggered rush would be a cure to every person’s bad day. Reacting easily to things. Getting mad at senseless arguments. Feeling edgy and volatile. Just run. Put gear on. Check everything. Hit the street. No stretching, no psyching. Just direct contact with that medium that challenges me over and over. Endorphin high.

<iframe width="760" height="515" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/GEqQW1-casM" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>